---
layout: post
title:  "To Immortalize Its Legends, Mathematics Needs a Hall of Fame"
categories: [math, satire]
---

Every year, during the last week of July, baseball royalty convenes in Cooperstown, New York to commemorate the sport’s newest class of Hall of Fame inductees. It’s a warm and pensive affair. Tracts of folding chairs seat a rapt audience absorbing the wisdom of each half-hour long induction speech. For the inductees, it’s a moment seasoned with introspection, gratitude, and  surely a pinch of pride: the path to Cooperstown lies unbeaten and easily lost. Of the over 20,000 major leaguers that have embarked on the journey, only 270 have stayed the course.

Originally inaugurated as a drawing card for Depression-era Cooperstown, the National Baseball Hall of Fame now stands as the preeminent bastion of baseball lore. Its three-story museum exhibits everything from baseball movie memorabilia to an all-inclusive timeline of the game’s storied past. And of course, there’s the Plaque Gallery. Engraved in bronze are the names and faces of those legendary players who have left an indelible mark on the game, the main characters in the epic of baseball.

As I browsed through images of the plaques online, a thought occurred to me. What about the Bonds, Sosa, and McGwire of mathematics? Should Euclid, Euler, and Gauss be memorialized only in theorem names and Wikipedia pages? Of course not. It is indeed long past time to give genius its due: mathematics requires its own hall of fame.

The history of mathematics is little more than the history of great individuals. Since antiquity, the contributions of the top fraction of a percent of mathematicians have laughably dwarfed those of the rest. It’s Everest versus the Eiffel Tower, Dante versus Drake. Not that any of this should be surprising to anyone. Just like baseball talent, God did not inject everyone with mathematical genius, instead choosing to inoculate a cadre of blessed souls, and even then, some with far higher dosage than others. The master Henri Poincaré put it best: “Mathematicians are born, not made.”

This element makes the field particularly amenable to the idea of a hall of fame. If only a handful of these masterminds are born every generation, then we should do well in preserving their work, and their spirit, as triumphs of humanity. For us unsophisticated sorts, we can and should revere these godsends with that same deferential awe usually reserved for our deities. Mathematically, at least, no amount of hard work and perseverance could ever propel us to their distant universe. Yet if the hall of fame is to be not only a recognition of achievements, but also a celebration of lives, we would nevertheless have plenty to gain. Learning about how the greats put their talent to work, how they persisted in honing their craft, how they sacrificed for the pursuit of knowledge—their lives can teach us what it takes to succeed, perhaps on a smaller scale, or even in a different vocation.

Take John Forbes Nash.[^1] In his prime, he personified what can only be called a killer instinct, sauntering into the hallowed halls of MIT with the swaggering conviction that he was the greatest geometer on earth, capable of solving any open problem in the field. When a now-forgotten professor challenged him with the isometric embedding conjecture, then considered virtually insoluble, Nash hunkered down and emerged with the seminal Nash Embedding Theorems a few short years later. We should all strive to mirror Nash’s confidence: ego is the wellspring of willpower, and ultimately, triumph.

Or take David Hilbert, from whom we can learn about making the ultimate sacrifice. Hilbert’s only son, Franz, was deeply unstable. After a manic episode during which Franz raved wildly about a host of malicious phantoms, Hilbert called a psychiatrist, and Franz was admitted to a nearby mental health hospital. It was here when Hilbert faced a pivotal choice: to spend his years caring for Franz, or to continue sparring with the riddles of mathematics. His decision marks an astounding conquest of biological instinct by rational resolve: “From now on,” he confided to Richard Courant, “I must consider myself as not having a son.”[^2]

Nash and Hilbert are just two of the many heroes who’s stories punctuate the history of mathematics. Yet if a budding mathematician wished to learn about their lives in detail, they would find no centralized, authoritative record, only a book here or a video there. A hall of fame, at the very least, would fill this informational lacuna. The institution would curate a thorough library of articles and books dedicated to the virtuosos of mathematics. It would also oversee a museum, where visitors can reflect with hushed reverence in the shadow of the hall’s inductees.

---

When a devotee of mathematics goes into raptures about a particularly elegant and beautiful result, one can usually discern a religious undertone to their speech. There’s a feeling that the proof was foreordained by a brilliant spirit, and that same spirit must have possessed the mind of the prover. This mathematical faith, if one can call it that, is pervasive. A hall of fame would offer a digital and physical home to embody this faith, showing how it inspired some of the best and brightest that humanity has ever had to offer.

[^1]: Enshrining Nash in the Cooperstown of math would be a first concrete step in completing the long-overdue task of reclaiming this wizard from the economists. Forty years after the mathematics community snubbed him of a Fields Medal, the dismal science finally cashed in its free lunch when they awarded Nash their disgrace of a Nobel Prize, tethering him to the field of economics in the public consciousness. _A Beautiful Mind_ didn’t help, either. And before you say it, no, no one has heard of the Abel Prize.
[^2]: Constance Reid, _Hilbert_, 139.
